So let me quickly refresh our knowledge on how the web works.
If you are totally aware of all of this, you can of course skip this lecture.
Now the web works like this,
we get got a user, a client,
maybe you sitting in front of your browser, visiting a webpage or already being on a webpage and submitting
a form,
so you're interacting with webpages.
Let's say you are visiting it,
so you're entering some url into your browser
and what happens behind the scenes is actually that the browser reaches out to some domain name servers
to look that domain up because this domain is not really the address of your server,
it's basically an encoded human readable version of that address you could say, your server itself has just an
IP address but this is just some technical thing behind the scenes,
in the end you enter this url and it will lead to some server. You therefore or the browser therefore
sends a request to that server
with that given IP address I mentioned, so the IP address belonging to that domain.
Now thus far that's all interesting but now we reach the part where nodejs comes into play, where your
nodejs code matters.
You write the code that runs on that computer in the Internet which has that IP address,
you write the code that spins up that server which is able to handle the incoming request and do something
with it.
Now you don't need to use nodejs
for this, you could use PHP, asp.net, Ruby on Rails,
anything like that
but in this course, we'll obviously use nodejs because well it's a nodejs course.
Now in this code, you can do all kinds of things and I already mentioned this in the first course module,
user input validation,
communicating with the database maybe which runs on a separate database server but which you typically
reach out to from your backend, so your server side code
and once you're done with that, you do one important thing, you send back a response to the client.
This response can be some html text, some html code which is then handled by the client but it could
also be some other kind of data like a file, some json or xml
data.
The response is more than just the content by the way, a response and also a request also has headers,
this is some meta information which is attached to request and response describing what's inside it
for example
but we'll see this too.
So this is how the web generally works and nodejs is the part we will focus on, it is the code that makes
up that server in the end.
Now that request and response transmission is done through some protocol,
so basically a standardized way of communicating you could say because obviously, to correctly handle a
request and send back a response the browser can work with,
we have to follow some rules and these rules are defined by the protocol we use, http or https.
Http stands for hypertext transfer protocol
and there we simply define or it is defined how a valid request looks like and how the data should
be transferred from browser to server
and the other way around and https simply is the same with SSL encryption turned on where all the
data that is transmitted is actually encrypted so that if anyone is spoofing your connection, they can't
read your data.
Now towards the end of the course, I will show you how to enable https, for the majority we'll just
use http since we'll only be developing that code, we'll only work on it locally
but once we put it into production, I will also show you how to turn on that SSL encryption.
This is how the web works
in a nutshell and how nodejs is related to it and this is exactly where we will now continue working
with nodejs and where we will now finally create a server with nodejs.